## Introduction
An application is a computer program designed to help users perform specific tasks, rather than focusing on the internal workings of the computer Linux distributions provide a wide range of applications for tasks like word processing, web browsing, multimedia playback, and editing. Often multiple applications are available for the same task, allowing users to select the one that best meets their needs.

## Software Packages
Most Linux distributions come with a set of pre-installed applications and provide access to additional software through a package repository managed by a package manager. Different distributions use different package management systems. For example, Debian, Ubuntu, and Linux Mint use the **dpkg**, **apt-get**, and **apt** tools to handle DEB packages, while Red Hat, Fedora, and CentOS use **rpm**, **yum**, and **dnf** to manage RPM packages.

These package managers automatically handle dependencies—auxiliary packages needed by other software—and ensure that the correct packages and updates are installed for each distribution. While the commands **dpkg** and **rpm** operate on individual files, most package management tasks are handled by **apt-get**, **apt**, **yum**, or **dnf**, which can download and install new packages, manage dependencies, and update existing software.

## Package Installation
If you try to use the figlet command, which prints enlarged text on the terminal, and receive a message saying the command is not found, it means figlet is not installed.
```bash
$ figlet
```
If you receive a "command not found" message for figlet, it likely means the package is not installed. On DEB-based systems, you can search for it using:
```bash
$ apt-cache search figlet
```
or
```bash
$ apt search figlet
```
This command searches for occurrences of "figlet" in package names and descriptions.

If the search identifies a package called figlet, you can install it using special permissions typically granted to the root user. On desktop systems, you can use sudo to gain these permissions:

To install the package, use:
```bash
$ sudo apt-get install figlet
```
Once you run the installation command with sudo, the figlet package will be downloaded and installed on your system. Any necessary dependencies for figlet will also be automatically downloaded and installed.

After the download and installation are complete, all necessary files will be copied to their respective locations, and any additional configuration will be handled. The figlet command will then be available for use.

```bash
$ figlet Awesome
```

This will display the word "Awesome" in a large ASCII art format.

In distributions based on RPM packages, searches are performed using **yum** search
package_name or dnf search package_name.

## Package Removal
To remove an installed package, you can use the same commands as for installation, but with the **remove** keyword:

```bash
$ sudo apt-get remove figlet
```

After confirming the operation, the package is erased from the system. The configuration files of the removed packages are kept on the system, so they can be used again if the package is reinstalled in the future. To remove configuration files run:

```bash
$ sudo apt-get purge figlet
```

## Server Programs
When a web browser requests a page, it connects to a remote computer known as a server, while the local computer running the browser is referred to as the client. The server, which can be either a standard desktop or specialized hardware, uses an HTTP server program to manage and deliver web content. Popular HTTP servers include Apache, Nginx, and lighttpd.

Web pages might involve multiple requests for static files or dynamic content. The HTTP server handles these requests, collecting and sending the necessary data to the browser. This process involves both server-side operations (often using PHP) and client-side operations (typically using JavaScript).

HTTP servers often interact with database servers to retrieve or store data. For instance, dynamic web pages might require data from a database, and user inputs like registrations are stored in databases.

Databases organize information in a structured format, allowing for efficient data management and retrieval. Relational databases, where data is stored in tables, are common. Popular open-source relational databases include MariaDB (a fork of MySQL) and PostgreSQL.

## Data Sharing
In local networks, it's important for computers to both access the Internet and communicate with each other. For instance, you might want to access files on a desktop computer from a portable device without using physical media like USB drives.

For Linux machines, NFS (Network File System) is commonly used to share files. NFS allows a computer to share directories over the network, so other machines can read and write files in these directories. It can even be used to share an entire operating system's directory tree for use by thin clients, which is useful in large networks to simplify system maintenance.

When dealing with other operating systems, Samba is recommended. Samba implements a protocol for sharing files and printers compatible with various operating systems, including Windows. It also enables Linux workstations to integrate with a domain controller for centralized authentication, managed by services like Microsoft’s Active Directory. Since version 4, Samba can act as a domain controller in mixed-OS environments.

For cloud-based data sharing, consider ownCloud or Nextcloud. Both provide similar features such as file sharing, sync, collaborative workspaces, and more. Nextcloud offers additional private audio/video conferencing, while ownCloud focuses on file sharing and third-party integrations. Both can be installed on a private server, providing control over sensitive data and avoiding reliance on external servers. They require a web server like Apache and should use HTTPS to encrypt connections.

## Network Administration
Communication between computers relies on proper network configuration, managed by programs running on routers using DHCP (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol) and DNS (Domain Name System).

- DHCP: Assigns IP addresses to devices automatically when they connect to a network, whether wired or wireless. This eliminates the need for manual IP configuration, which is impractical in both small and large networks. Routers typically come with a DHCP server pre-configured to handle this task.

- DNS: Translates domain names (like www.example.com) into IP addresses (like 203.0.113.165) so devices can communicate over the network. The IP address of the DNS server is provided by the ISP’s DHCP server and is used to perform these translations.

Both DHCP and DNS settings can be adjusted via the router's web interface. This allows you to restrict IP assignments to specific devices, set fixed IP addresses, or change the DNS server to third-party options (like Google or OpenDNS) for potentially better performance and additional features.